---
title: Introduction
sidebar: dw_sidebar
permalink: dw_introduction.html
folder: dw
---

## Dungeon World

Dungeon World is a world of fantastic adventure. A world of magic, gods and
demons, of good and evil, law and chaos. Brave heroes venture into the most
dangerous corners of the land in search of gold and glory.

Adventurers take many shapes in Dungeon World. The races of elves, men,
dwarves, and halflings all have their heroes. Some are near-invincible beasts
of battle encased in iron armor. Others are more mysterious, conjuring up and
wielding the mighty forces of magic. Treasure and glory are sought by a holy
cleric, a tricky thief, a mighty paladin, and more.

It isn’t all easy heroics and noble bravery, though. Every time the ranger
guides his friends through the ancient woods there are a hundred things
waiting to bite his head off. Slavering hordes of goblin troops, maybe. Or is
this the Cursed Wood, where dwells the Gray Witch? Or the throngs of hateful
dead, looking to drag a meaty corpse back to their lair? Scary, sure, but
there’s treasure, too. More gold and jewels and magic lost to man have fallen
between the cracks in the world than you can imagine. Who better to retrieve
it than a band of stalwart heroes?

You and your friends _are_ those heroes. You go where others can’t or won’t.
There are monstrous things lurking in the world. Are you ready to face them?

## The Bard

The poems say an adventurer’s life is all open roads and the glory of coin and
combat. The tales told in every farmhand-filled inn have to have some ring of
truth to them, don’t they? The songs to inspire peasantry and royals alike—to
soothe the savage beast or drive men to a frenzy—have to come from somewhere.

Enter the bard. You, with your smooth tongue and quick wit. You teller-of-
tales and singer-of-songs. A mere minstrel can retell a thing, but it takes a
true bard to live it. Strap on your boots, noble orator. Sharpen that hidden
dagger and take up the call. Someone’s got to be there, fighting shoulder-to-
shoulder with the goons and the thugs and the soon-to-be-heroes. Who better
than you to write the tale of your own heroism?

Nobody. Get going.

## The Cleric

The lands of Dungeon World are a gods-forsaken mess. They’re lousy with the
walking dead, beasts of all sorts, and the vast unnatural spaces between safe
and temple-blessed civilizations. It is a godless world out there. That’s why
it needs you.

Bringing the glory of your god to the heathens isn’t just in your nature—it’s
your calling. It falls to you to proselytize with sword and mace and spell, to
cleave deep into the witless heart of the wilds and plant the seed of divinity
there. Some say that it’s best to keep the gods close to your heart. You know
that’s rubbish. God lives at the edge of a blade.

Show the world who is lord.

## The Druid

Cast your eyes around the fire. What has brought you to these people, stinking
of the dust and sweat of the city? Perhaps it is a kindness—do you protect
them as the mother bear watches over her cubs? Are they your pack, now?
Strange brothers and sisters you have. Whatever your inspiration, they would
certainly fail without your sharp senses and sharper claws.

You are of the sacred spaces; you are born of soil and wear the marks of her
spirits on your skin. You may have had a life before, maybe you were a city
dweller like them, but not now. You’ve given up that static shape. Listen to
your allies pray to their carved stone gods and polish their silver shells.
They speak of the glory they’ll find back in that festering town you left
behind.

Their gods are children, their steel is false protection. You walk the old
ways, you wear the pelts of the earth itself. You’ll take your share of the
treasure, but will you ever walk as one of them? Only time will tell.

## The Fighter

It’s a thankless job—living day to day by your armor and the skill of your
arm, diving heedlessly into danger. They won’t be playing golden horns for the
time you took that knife to the ribs for them in the bar in Bucksberg. No
flock of angels will sing of the time you dragged them, still screaming, from
the edge of the Pits of Madness, no.

Forget them.

You do this for the guts and the glory, for the scream of battle and the hot,
hot blood of it. You are a beast of iron. Your friends may carry blades of
forged steel but, fighter, you are steel. While your traveling companions
might moan about their wounds around a campfire in the wilderness, you bear
your scars with pride.

You are the wall—let every danger smash itself to dust on you. In the end,
you’ll be the last one standing.

## The Paladin

Hell awaits. An eternity of torment in fire or ice or whatever best suits the
sins of the damned throngs of Dungeon World. All that stands between the pits
of that grim torture and salvation is you. Holy man, armored war machine,
templar of the Good and the Light, right? The cleric may say his prayers at
night to the gods, dwelling in their heavens. The fighter may wield his sharp
sword in the name of “good” but you know. Only you.

Eyes, hands, and sweet killing blow of the gods, you are. Yours is the gift of
righteousness and virtue—of justice, of Vision, too. A purity of intent that
your companions do not have.

So guide these fools, paladin. Take up your holy cause and bring salvation to
the wastrel world.

Vae victis, right?

## The Ranger

These city-born folk you travel with. Have they heard the call of the wolf?
Felt the winds howl in the bleak deserts of the East? Have they hunted their
prey with the bow and the knife like you? Hell no. That’s why they need you.

Guide. Hunter. Creature of the wilds. You are these things and more. Your time
in the wilderness may have been solitary until now, but the call of some
greater thing—call it fate if you like—has cast your lot with these folk.
Brave, they may be. Powerful and strong, too. But only you know the secrets of
the spaces between.

Without you, they’d be lost. Blaze a trail through the blood and dark,
strider.

## The Thief

You’ve heard them, sitting around the campfire. Bragging about this battle or
that, or about how their gods are smiling on your merry band. You count your
coins and smile to yourself—this is the thrill above all. You alone know the
secret of Dungeon World: filthy, filthy lucre.

Sure, they give you lip for all the times you’ve snuck off alone, but without
you, every one of them would have been dissected by a flying guillotine or
poisoned straight to death by some ancient needle trap. So let them complain.
When you’re done with all this delving you’ll toast their heroes’ graves.

From your castle. Full of gold. You rogue.

## The Wizard

Dungeon World has rules. Not the laws of men or the rule of some petty tyrant.
Bigger, better rules. You drop something—it falls. You can’t make something
out of nothing. The dead stay dead, right?

Oh, the things we tell ourselves to feel better about the long, dark nights.

You’ve spent so very long poring over those tomes of yours. Conducting
experiments that nearly drove you mad and casting summonings that endangered
your very soul. For what? For power. What else is there? Not just the power of
King or Country but the power to boil a man’s blood in his veins. To call on
the thunder of the sky and the churn of the roiling earth. To shrug off the
rules the world holds so dear.

Let them cast their sidelong glances. Let them call you “warlock” or
“diabolist.” Who among them can hurl fireballs from their eyes?

Yeah. Didn’t think so.

{% include links.html %}
