---
title: Why Play?
sidebar: dw_sidebar
permalink: dw_why_play_dungeon_world.html
folder: dw
---

## Why play Dungeon World?

First, to see the characters do **amazing things**. To see them explore the
unexplored, slay the undying, and go from the deepest bowels of the world to
the highest peaks of the heavens. To see them caught up in momentous events
and grand tragedies.

Second, to see them **struggle together**. To gather as a party despite their
differences and stand united against their foes, or to argue over treasure,
debate battle plans, and join in righteous celebration over a victory hard-
won.

Third, because **the world still has so many places to explore**. There are
unlooted tombs and dragon hoards dotting the countryside just waiting for
quick-fingered and strong-armed adventurers to discover them. That unexplored
world has plans of its own. Play to see what they are and how they’ll change
the lives of our characters.

## How to Use This Book

This book is going to teach you how to play Dungeon World. If you’re going to
be the GM, you’re going to need to read the whole thing, though you can skim
through the monster stats for now and save the Advanced Delving chapter for
later. Try printing the play aids too, they’ll help you see what’s most
important. If you’re a player, you might not need to read more than Playing
the Game—a lot of the rules in Dungeon World will be contained in the
character sheets you use during the game itself. You’ll come back to the text
a few times throughout your game to refer to certain rules, but it should be a
rare occasion.

## Setting Up

To play Dungeon World, you’ll need to gather yourself and 2–5 friends. A group
of 4 to 6, including you, is best. Choose one person to be the Game Master
\(GM\). Everyone else will be players, taking the role of the characters in
the game \(we call these the player characters or PCs\). As you play, the
players say what their characters say, think, and do. The GM describes
everything else in the world.

You can play a single session or string together multiple sessions into a
campaign. Plan accordingly if you plan on playing a campaign, maybe setting
aside a night of the week to play. Each session will usually be a few hours
and you’ll be able to start playing right away within the first session.

You’ll need to print some materials. Before you start a new game, find or
print off at least:

  * A few copies of the basic and special moves
  * One copy of each class sheet
  * One copy each of the cleric and wizard spell sheets
  * One copy of the adventure sheet and GM moves
  * Miscellanea such as: pens and pencils, scrap paper for maps and notes, maybe some index cards

Everyone at the table will need something to write with and some six-sided
dice. Two dice is the minimum but two dice per player is a good idea.

You’ll also need some specialized dice: four-sided, eight-sided, ten-sided and
twelve-sided. One of each is enough but more is better: you won’t have to pass
them around so much.

## What’s Dungeon World Like to Play?

Playing Dungeon World is all about finding out what happens when your
characters encounter dangerous and exciting monsters, strange ruins, and
unusual people on their quest for gold and glory. It’s a conversation between
the players and the GM—the GM tells the players what they see and hear in the
world around them and the players say what their characters are thinking,
feeling, and doing. Sometimes those descriptions will trigger a move—something
that’ll cause everyone to stop and say “time to roll the dice to see what
happens.” For a moment everyone hangs on the edges of their seats as the dice
clatter to a stop. Tension and excitement are always the result, no matter how
the dice land.

As you play your characters they’ll change from their adventures and gain
experience while learning about the world, overcoming monsters, and gathering
riches. You’ll discover how they feel about each other and where their moral
compass points them. When they accrue enough experience they’ll gain levels,
becoming more powerful and having more options to explore.

You can play Dungeon World with the same group, session to session, over a
long series of adventures, watching your characters change and grow together.
You can play it as a self-contained game in a single-session, too. Whether a
long campaign or a one-shot, Dungeon World’s rules are here to guide you and
help you create a world of fantasy adventure. Time to get out there and
explore it\!

{% include links.html %}
